[MUSIC]
Alright, so so today's lecture is about
the debugging tools that are built into R.
So these come with R.
They're not part of any package and they
can be useful for kind of
figuring anything out, figuring out what's
wrong
after you've discovered there's a problem,
right.
So how do you know that there's a problem?
So, there are a couple of
indications that R, will produce that that
will
give you the sense that there's something
going on.
And they kind of, and this is the, roughly
the gradient.
And so I think I mentioned this before.
But, basically there are three main types
of indications.
The first is a message.
And a message is a very tame notification.
It's just an in, it could be a diagnostic
message that something happened.
But it could, it could be nothing.
Okay?
And and so the message won't stop your
function from executing.
It will just it will print.
There will be a message that gets printed
to the screen
and the execution of the function will
continue and that's all.
The next level up is the warning.
All right?
So the warning is another indication.
Usually, if you're writing a function, you
are choosing, you're trying
to figure out, okay, what's a message and
what's a warning.
furthermore, or if you're
using a function and you're figuring out
well what does that
mean, a warning is an indication that
something unexpected happened it's
not necessarily a problem, and may, and
many times you, you,
you explicitly want to ignore warnings but
there's something unexpected happened.
So the function was expecting one thing,
and it got something slightly different.
It wasn't enough to kill the whole thing,
But it was enough to kind of trigger this
warning.
So execution of the function will continue
if a
warning occurs but you'll get a message
after the end,
so once you'll get a message when the
function completes execution.
So when the function comes back, when you
get your console back, that's when the
warning appears.
So you won't get a warning in the middle
of the execution.
By default.
So this is, these are generated by the
warning function, sorry
I should say the messages are generated by
the message function.
And then an error is the last stop, right?
So an error is a fatal problem.
This stops execution of the function.
And and these, and error messages are
produced by the stop function.
So and then there's a general notion of a
condition.
Which is it's the higher level concept.
It can, all three of these things are, are
conditions.
And so you can, you can imagine that, and
so
it, you can create new conditions if you
wanted to.
So if you have, and generally you're not
going to
be doing this at this level but if you
have
a, a, another type of of, condition that
you want
to, kind of trigger when something, when a
special thing happens.
So it's not an error, it's not a warning,
and it's not a message.
You can create your own conditions and and
using some of the functions that are
available.
So we won't be doing that now, but there
is this notion of a condition and it's,
it's generic.
So this is your basic warning, right?
You take the log of a negative number.
You can't do that, right?
Now notice that you get a value back.
It's a NaN, right?
Not a number.
And, but you also get this warning
which occurred after the execution of the
function.
And it just says that in the log of minus
1 NaNs are produced, right?
So this is your typical and, and sometimes
that's fine.
Because maybe you're taking a log of a
bunch
of numbers and maybe some of them are
negative, but you don't really care
and then you're going to make some sort of
plot or something like that.
So so this is the kind of thing where you
probably wouldn't want the function's
behavior to just stop anytime it sees a
negative number because sometimes these
things just happen.
You get negative numbers on occasion and
you want to take the log anyway.
So so that's a warning.
Now I've got a little function here that
I've created.
It's very simple it takes your input.
It checks to see if it's greater than
zero.
If it's greater than zero, it prints a
message saying x is greater than zero.
[COUGH] If it's less than or equal to
zero, you get
a message saying that it's less than or
equal to zero.
So very handy function I'm, I'm sure
you'll all be using soon.
and, and then last I want to mention this
part here.
So invisible is a function that that, that
stops or I should say prevents
auto printing.
So normally when you, if I if I'm at
command line and I type a function,
remember the, and
I execute a function the, the function
will return
the last element of, that's in its
function body, right?
So if the last sum in this function body
is
like is numeric vector, it will return
that numeric vector.
Now what happens is that if you just
execute the function,
that numeric venture, vector will be
automatically printed to the console
because it got returned by the function
and R will
use auto printing to just print that to
the console.
If I call invisible on the return object,
then it will still
return the same object but it won't, it
wont do the auto printing.
So you can call the function and the
object will be returned.
But there won't be any auto printing.
So a, a, a, a, an example of a function
like this is the load function.
So we haven't really used that much, but
the load functions loads
objects from what, from a saved work
space,
so it's like the opposite of of save,
right?
and, but when, and when it loads the
objects, it actually returns
a character vector containing the names of
all the objects that it loads.
But that doesn't get printed to the
screen and because, it's, it's returned
invisibly.
Okay.
So if you have a function that returns
something invisibly then the return, what
happens is that the object that gets, that
gets returned by that function doesn't
get printed to the console and so
sometimes
you want that to happen and sometimes you
don't.
Sometimes it doesn't matter.
So here I've, I've just added this here
just
so I can, you know, tell you about it.
It's not particularly important.
But actually, the print, actually I should
say that any print function
here actually all print functions will
return the string that it prints.
Okay.
So when you say print X, what gets
returned
is a string, X.
Right?
But you don't actually see that, because
it, the,
the, the, the return value is, is, is
returned invisibly.
Right?
So it actually.
So, so, so, so you could assign the output
of print to, like, an, an object.
But you.
Generally speaking, you never do that.
So, anyway.
That was a little diversion on invisible.
So here I, I create my
printmessage function, and I call
printmessage(1), great.
No problem.
I get the message x is greater than 0.
Okay.
So and so what does printmessage return,
just before I go on?
Printmessage returns its argument,
alright.
And so actually, if I had assigned print,
the output or printmessage to
some other object, it would be the number
one in this case, right.
Even though it didn't printout the number
one anywhere.
So now,
I'm going to pass it directly an NA,
right.
And and, and we're going to get an error
here because you can't
make the comparison if NA was greater than
zero, it's not defined, right.
And so it doesn't know what to do it can't
move on.
It, and so it has to error out.
Okay, so you get an error saying that in
this expression if X is greater than zero
the missing value, you, you have a missing
value
where, so it was expecting true or false
and
instead it got NA, which is neither true
or, nor false.
Right, okay.
So something happened there that's wrong.
Now, I'm going to to fixed this problem so
to speak.
I've got a new function print message two
and the first thing we are going
to do is I'm going to check to see if the
argument is NA, right?
So, now I if it's NA, I'm going to print
this message,
right.
So it's not going to produce an error,
it's just going to print, print a
different message.
So this function's going to print one of
three messages
for now and then it's going to return its
argument, invisibly.
So when I call this, so now
what, so what's something that might
typically happen?
Well I, I calculate the log of minus 1 and
I assign it to X.
So that doesn't stop anything.
I just get a warning, and I move on, all
right?
Now I'm going to printmessage on x, and
I'm getting x as a missing value, right?
So, now that, now there's no error there
but it's, it may be unexpected, right?
Because maybe I, I,
I, maybe I thought that, okay, well the
thing that I'm inputting into
printmessage2 is, is like
some positive number, so I thought I was
going
to get the message X is greater than zero.
But instead I'm getting this message x is
a missing value.
So what happened right?
So um,this is the kind of thing where
where what you thought you were going
to get, where your expectation is
different from
actually kind of what the function
produced, right?
And so all I'm trying to say here is
how do you know when something's gone
wrong, right?
And sometimes it's easy to tell like in
the case where you got the error message.
But sometimes it's not easy to tell
because here there's no
error but it's not exactly what it, what I
was expecting, okay.
It's when you, when you're looking at a
function, you think
something's gone wrong, there's a couple
questions you want to ask yourself.
To see whether there something actually is
wrong, or maybe,
or is there is something we call user
error, okay?
So what was your, so the thing about when
you're kind of thinking about, when you're
debugging a function you want to answer
all
these questions as you're going through
your process here.
So what was the input that you put?
What, what did you feed into that
function?
Okay, not what you thought you fed into
that function, what did you actually into
that function?
Okay, so I thought I fed that function a
positive
number but in reality I fed it a, a NaN.
Alright, so how did you call the function?
What are were the arguments that you gave?
Things like that.
What were you expecting?
So you, and this is important when you're
asking
someone for help, or you're asking someone
a question.
I can't just, it's not that useful to say
oh the printmessage2 to function didn't
work.
How do you know it didn't work, alright?
Because, and then you say, well I was
expecting this, but I got that, okay?
That's how you know it doesn't work.
And then, someone could say, well you
shouldn't have expected this, because
that's not what that function does, or you
know, or something like that.
But or you can say, okay, here's the
problem.
So what were you were expecting is then
very important to be
able to articulate at least to yourself
and maybe to other people.
What was the output that you were
expecting, were
the were you expecting some message that
you didn't get?
Or other results, other numerical results,
things like that.
So what we're expecting, and then of
course, what did you actually get?
How do, how did what you actually get
differ from what you're expecting?
And then of course were expectations
correct in the first place?
So, if you were expecting something that
was, that was in
fact incorrect then your notion of what is
correct and incorrect
is now being challenged, right?
So an important, and another key aspect of
debugging of course
is you have to be able to reproduce the
problem, right?
Because if you can never reproduce the
problem, you'll never have a chance
in figuring it what went wrong, because it
only happened that one time, right?
So this is very, very, very, very
important.
And unless it's a very I mean unless it's
like the most basic problem.
And I can't even say what that would be.
You have to be able to reproduce the
problem.
You know, because you have to be able to
show someone this is how I created the
problem.
Because most people are not going to know
if you just show them the output of
the error message, or what that means, or
where it came from or how you got there.
Okay, so the process by which you
encounter
the error or the problem is very
important.
So you, you have to know how to reproduce
the problem.
There are some problems, and
so when I was talking about, for example,
when
in random number generation you need to
set the
seed because it may be that only under a
certain sequence of random numbers that a
problem occurs.
And, if you're not setting the seed, you
will never be able to reproduce that
problem,
because every time you run it, it's going
to be a different set of random numbers.
There are other types of problems that can
be hard to reproduce.
They, and, but they're more complex.
They're usually, for example, if you're
writing networking
co, networking functions, you know,
something, so you're
doing like parallel programming, often,
those kinds of problems
can be very hard to reproduce because they
depend
on activity in other machines and things
like that.
You can't really reproduce that.
Things that, if you're getting code over
the internet, and so if
you're getting data over the internet, and
your code is kind of interacting
with things in the web, that can, problems
there can sometimes be
hard to reproduce because servers on the
other side may change or whatever.
And so you, you can't
always freeze things in time.
If it's something that's just happening on
your computer
it's usually going to be easier to
reproduce the problems.
so, unless, I mean only under very
esoteric circumstances, circumstances
will it be hard to reproduce a problem on
your computer.